[00:00:00.02] zoom.us:	I didn't do it today, too, so... Lots of stuff going on this week. Hi, Robert. Checking if there are other Roberts. Oh, there is a different Robert. That's not me. But hey, anyway, anyway Are you the Robert with I can learn? Yeah, I am actually Robert Robert on Mute and Cat. >> Yeah, I was just saying, Robert Peake is the unofficial poet of Protocol Institute now. We should make a, what's that, is it Poet Laureate? Is that the title nations give their poets? Okay. >> Nation states do. Or I could do, um. in residence yeah you might have to give me a residence though i don't know no i think we have nation-state ambitions i think you're going to be poet laureate inaugural poet laureate the nation is very small at the moment but we'll grow with it i'm getting on the ground floor here yeah for uoc studying we might only be able to do one or two floors. Hey Evan, nice to see you again. Where's the mustache? Trying trying a new look trying a new look this year. It's good. Evan represents the one emergency/crisis we've had in the program so far. She got hit by a car at the Edge Esmeralda event a couple of years ago. - And still thriving. - We now give a safety brief at the beginning of every event, we're like, hey. sure you look both ways you know uh yeah i'm glad that wasn't i mean worse than it was okay i think we've got um enough people here to start so i'll just um i'll share my screen we have kind of a casual agenda here. So I'll say a bit of stuff, Venkat I'll share some stuff. We'd like to do a round robin with you. We've got 90 minutes. Some breakout groups and yeah, then kind of just wrap up here. So I'll get going. Yeah, first of all, we just launched the protocol. Institute, which at this point is more of like renaming the thing and resetting the ambitions, reorienting what SOP is, and you're all the founding members, so welcome, this is your institute, we want to do this thing together, and that's why it's called the General Assembly. We're not sure about the frequency that we'll host. these things maybe like once a quarter more frequently if there's demand for it it depends on how many people attend as well but the goal for these general assemblies is to have all the members together to share ideas to figure out what to do next with the institute what to build it's going to take more than just Venkat and I who are like the ones mainly involved as well. Tim is helping as the chair of the advisory board and we have James helping with the magazine as the editor there, plus all the folks running SIGs. Everything that's happening goes a long way right now. So one of the reasons that I'm excited to do this and I find is interesting to work on. This is something I alluded to in my essay. I think that they're kind of technology that helps us build important non-events in the world and like this was my research theme in the first summer and I've continued to find it important. I think that many of the things that we kind of take for granted today, they're like hallmarks of progress are a result of good protocols. Another thing is even though they're substrate dependent, they are like so ubiquitous that by studying protocols, there's something like at their core that's worth figuring out. A lot of people ask me like, "Oh, what's the definition of this? "Is it really useful to generalize across?" all these different domains and I think it is I think there is a lot of variation between you know healthcare and aviation but when we do figure out like what that core is and figure out really good ways to communicate it it seems to help people do things in the world and then lastly like I think the continuous appeal of them because they're weird like they're very much this fuzzy concept protocols but despite that they do affect real physical changing the world which is not something that i think many things do like process and policy these other p words might but like they're very much more saturated domains and like protocols are nice like they're kind of like spells and we get to work on them from scratch here. But yeah, why are we doing PI now versus before? I remember explicitly in the first summer of protocols that Venkat and Tim were saying like, this isn't an institution. This is a very temporary program. We're only gonna do this for a few years, maybe even just this summer, and I think that that was true, but there is a need for an institute now, because the effects of Summer of Protocols were kind of unexpected, and the successes were not all planned. It went on to inform Ethereum, of course, but on the other hand, also, everybody that I attended protocol school. to at Edges Morel, but all these online events we've done, the fiction, these were completely unplanned in that first summer with the launch of the Pram. I think those are the things that we want to like keep growing, keep getting the people to practice this stuff, build an institute that's going to be a home for like members to do ambitious things with their careers and like the study of protocols both academically and like an engineering thing if people want to launch startups eventually out of PI or this sort of thing there's so many options I think it's all those unplanned successes that we need PI to exist to help continue and I'm really excited for that so We're taking inspiration from some classic examples here like the IETF, the IEEE Engineering Association. More ambitiously, if we get 30 million dollars, we could do something like ARIA and actually have an incubator for early stage protocol technologies. I have these new sites that we've built. I think that the magazine looks super great. I'm excited for this to become our flagship project for this year. I love people's help in figuring out how to make this thing as stellar as possible. I think it's on a great trajectory. We've had a lot of growth. I think that the writing is improving. Venkat is going to talk about, you know, some of the world-building stuff that we've done. site are all the resources from the past three years. So, SOP 23, 24, 25, all the YouTube channel, Substack. It's, yeah, it's nice to have it all in one place now. We've also got our Institute website. So, this is the home of the Institute, which will be home for several initiatives. including the SIGs and Protocolize to start. We've got more coming, we've got another initiative that's being announced today that we'll talk about. I don't wanna leak it too much since we have Denise and James here, they might be able to talk about it, but pretty soon we'll be doing a lab in collaboration with the Long Now Foundation. This is kind of our first big... Institute collaboration we're really excited for. We'll be doing the Protocol Symposium this fall. This will be the second symposium so I'm excited for that. We'll alternate school and symposium every year and we've got other awesome stuff going on like the Strange Rules Venice Art Show which is I think going on this fall. Is that right? I get it's actually opening next week I'll be going for the closing in fall yeah it's opening angels so this this art show is named after the strange rules bit which we've been talking about since last year with the magazine and yeah if you're in Venice go check it out we'll be doing all sorts of stuff I know Sam Chua in Southeast Asia is running a bunch of things over there. You can connect with him. Nicholas, who's here, lives in Buenos Aires. He has a bunch of protocol readers. There's stuff happening all around the world, and I think that if we start opening chapters in places, it's going to be quite a network, and you should be able to find a protocol chapter anywhere where you visit. Last nuts and bolts thing. So we're spinning out from the EF starting from scratch. The rough plan right now is to incorporate as a not-for-profit in Canada. But yeah if you have experience spending up an organization this is basically it's my first time doing such a thing and basically new to it so. appreciate any advice you have going into this, and the last thing I'd say is if you have extra time, I'd say the most immediate way to add energy to Protocol Institute is participating in the SIGs that are already going, and if you have an idea for a SIG, maybe putting that in the general chat and Discord. So yeah, really excited for this. Benkask has some stuff to share too, and then we can go into the round robin. Oh, I need to share that again. Yeah, can you share that and scroll up to my section? I don't think you shared this talk with me yet. Um, yeah. Working in public means leaving comments like that on your first bullet point. Insert interesting analogy. Yeah, this has been kind of a little bit of a bit that I've been doing throughout the history of this program. Usually when we have like somewhat critical turning points like this where you kind of have to look for the right orienting thought, I usually look for one core anchor image or something to think about. I remember the year we were doing this. Now for some reason I was obsessed with eclipses, so I was making a lot of eclipse analogies. But yeah, thinking about where we are now, and since Timber is doing all the hard work of actually leading the operational side of the institute, and I get to call myself research director and do the fun stuff, some of the privileges. of getting middle-aged, I guess. I'm trying to think about, like, what does it mean to steward research on a topic as ambitious as protocolization, right? Because we're deliberately making it rhyme with things like, you know, urbanization, globalization, all these, like, big planet-level shuns. what is it like to really do something like this, right? And I'm a product of the old industrial era's research landscape. I mean, I did a PhD in postdoc in a traditional academic environment. I spent several years at Xerox in a traditional research lab. I've done like startupy things, and somehow it feels like All of those are almost the wrong model for a couple of different reasons. One is, of course, the whole world is changing in multiple ways. The industrial order is crumbling and we have like AI exploding all over the place as kind of a new substrate for organizing everything in completely novel ways. I was looking for what's a good. way to think about this. So earlier this year we had a post I wrote where we proposed this concept called new nature. So my definition of new nature was basically a way of thinking about the artificial part of our planet. So Herbert Simon had this great phrase of sciences of the artificial. So you know forms like an artificial layer on top of the natural geosphere, and it has its rules, right? Like, and the more we build up the technology stack, the more these rules look like the rules of nature. In some cases, they're not viable, right? So they're inviolable. In some cases, mathematically so. So this program started with... blockchain world and that's full of rules coming from cryptography where literally they act like laws of nature but even other things like you know emergent laws of how cities grow and change like organisms. A couple of centuries ago like Herbert Spencer was already thinking about how that has its own nature like reality. I think he called it the social organism. It was the beginning of a one of social Darwinism. So yeah, but the point is technology, when it gets sophisticated and systemic enough, it becomes like a new kind of nature, and I was thinking about how do we even think about this, and going back, I was just reading this wonderful biography of Alexander von Humboldt, who was It was kind of forgotten now, but there are something like 450 rivers, towns, lakes, things like that in the U.S. alone named for him, and all over the world, hundreds, thousands of things are named after Humboldt for very good reason, because Humboldt basically invented the idea of nature as we understand it today, right? So in the late 18th century to-- early 19th century when he started doing his work, the idea of nature was very much a religious one, like, you know, God created nature as a bunch of, like, you know, resources, a buffet of, like, animals and plants for our human use, and there wasn't much more thinking. There was a lot of taxonomizing. Carolus Linnaeus did, like, you know, the early taxonomic work, but Humboldt was the first one to start thinking of nature. nature of this large, organic, planet-scale emergent entity where everything is connected to everything else and influencing and shaping everything else, and he created frameworks and a language for people to talk about it, and I was stunned when I read this book about just how much he influenced everything, right? The climate movement came out of his influence on somebody. um what else the very word ecology came out of like his influence on a zoologist who did early ecological work he anticipated things like plate tectonics he anticipated darwin so his theory is like pretty much pre-darwinian so he basically laid the foundations for everything we think of as nature today and today it's familiar like if i said something like you know Oh, nature is this connected ecosystem where there are apex predators and keystone species, and there are these ecological webs that can collapse. This is familiar language. None of you will be thrown by me talking in this language, and we lack a similar language for talking about new nature. We still think of new nature, by which I mean technology, they used to talk about traditional, regular nature in the 18th century. Back then, it was like almost Noah's Ark-level cartoon views of nature, like two of a kind going on an Ark-level mental models of what nature is. Today, we think of, oh, there's iPhones and iPads and AI and blockchains. We do not ever think of this as like a large, connected… the artificial ecosystem that's growing, right? And I think we have an opportunity here. We are the rare generation where we get to do what Humboldt did. Now, Humboldt was like a unique genius with like a, you know, galaxy brain, ability to synthesize vast amounts of information, dash around the world doing like, you know, exploration in a very tough age. I definitely don't think I'm anywhere close to that. Neither is Timber. But what we have that Alexander von Humboldt didn't is we have AI, we have digital media, we can form social networks, we can instantly communicate anywhere on the planet. This Zoom call has people from Asia, South America, Europe, America. Humboldt had to send letters on ships for months. and have to like travel on dangerous journeys to go do stuff in Argentina. So anyway, so we have a chance to do that and this to me is the sort of high-level thought. Can we do for new nature what Humboldt did for nature? Can we create basically a new way of thinking about the artificial fear of our planet and come up with language? theories, ideas to talk and think about it, and this is not like, you know, a 10 year project or like, you know, something that you would do with just an academic scholarly discipline. This is like a 100, 200 year project. Like it took that long for Humboldt's initial sort of like catalysis to fully take form. So things we do here, it sounds like hubris to say so, often these like really long-lasting things start with very small scenes that plant a few key seeds, like Humboldt didn't have a big operation, he was like struggling for money most of his life, but he had that, you know, impact because he had the right set of integration ideas at the right time and I think we are in a similar position. So that's kind of the large. canvas in which I hope we can steward the research direction of what we're doing and right down at the ground level right now, the form that takes is the special interest groups we have. We have several. We have one in formal protocol theory. We have one in protocols for business that's focusing on adopting AI. We've got one on fiction. We've got one on memory. Small seeds, but I think we are like... studying things that have like not five-year impacts in the next DARPA cycle, but 50, 100-year impacts, right? So we really have to think about it differently, and yeah, we have to talk about like practical things like how do you fund this? We've all experienced different funding models. They're all changing now. So we have to think about those things, and definitely I want to talk with any of you who have experience. doing this. I have limited experience, but maybe we can pool our experience together. So that's important. We do have to get that going and like find a way to keep these small catalytic activities going. But I also want to emphasize that when you think at this scale of impact and ambition, you can't think in terms of the forms of existing institutions and saying, hey, we'll start a new journal and, you know, do a little... bit of academic research, you have to think about entire scenes, right? You have to think about, like, you know, the maker scene, for example, or the whole earth catalog scene from Stuart Bram that became two days long now. There's so many larger sort of, like, cultural phenomena that are catalyzed by small things like magazines and institutes. So, we kind of want to do that broad-based, full-stack way of trying to make this happen. happen. So when I say research and me trying to do research directing, I don't just mean like, you know, let's define some research problems and put some smart PhDs in universities to work on them, but more like anything goes. Open source, independent scholarship, hacking away, making shit up, making up weird art, any and all means. to go and explore these really fascinating topics and come up with like a understanding of new nature are on the table. So that's kind of where we want to start. So really everything is wide open and you're here at the right place on the ground floor level to influence this, and yeah, we did a two day strategy retreat Timber, myself, and Kim Bako, who's not here right now, but he's been a huge part of this, helping us think through this. So we are kind of representing Tim's views here as well. But yeah, so we have a lot of ideas. They're still in the form of notes and whiteboard photographs, but we've not yet put them together in like, you know, any kind of rigid plan, which is why we're talking to you guys as early as possible. will help us figure this out, and those of you, you can be as involved as you want to be. The more involved you want to be, the more we'll share and loop you into our thinking. So just reach out and talk to us if you're interested in participating. So I think that's all I had. Back to you, Timber. - Okay. Yeah, now we want to open up to you guys. Since there are a lot of people here. This is going to be kind of structured, then we'll have breakout groups which can be more freewheeling so first round Robin, and I can I can I can start with this is share one idea for an activity that you'd like to see PI support or do itself, including something that you're doing that you can use an institutional backing for. So, one, one thing that I would really like to see is, and RAP has already doing this like I think that having protocol Institute, be a kind of partner for the indie consultant scene that is already kind of around protocol Institute would be good so if you want to try to do protocol based consulting. for like an organization and want to do it like under the name Protocol Institute, I think that we could come up with like a pretty good model for having that happen. I've worked with Patrick Atwater on some protocol consulting stuff and it worked pretty well. I think people want a fresh lens to look at their problems through and protocols seem to be a first class one. to deploy. So I think that's a low-hanging project that we could start doing and it fits well with the kind of community of indies that are around Protocol Institute already. Venkat, you have an idea? Yeah, so the idea I have been interested in for over a year, and it's already underway, is the idea of extended universes as a... way of exploring ideas spaces. So think Marvel, but for like, you know, more discipline exploration. So I think Sachin is on the call, but Sachin and Spencer have been kind of leading our thinking on how to do protocol fiction, right? And we've already started writing a series of short stories that become like, you know, a fiction extended universe that is exploring, you know, the protocolized future. in very rich ways. So we have that, but I'd like to do something similar with nonfiction as well. Like, how do you explore large collaborative idea spaces with almost like extended nonfiction universes? So I'm not quite sure how to do that, but I think that's, it's almost like we need a protocol for that kind of thinking. So we're doing that with the SIGs. to some extent, but we still have to work that out. So extended universes. Yeah. How do you want to cue up the rest, Timber? The rest, I-- yeah, maybe just raise your hand, and then you can go like that. Evan, I'll have to keep track of the cue. Yeah, it seems like the Institute has an opportunity to provide-- professional and yet independent view on protocol spaces. So in the area of something like a report, so in my space, distributed social networking protocols, giving some sort of analysis, let's call it Gartner group kind of report that would give a, you know, So, understanding of what the protocol space is like could go in other directions too, looking for opportunities for protocols in a space, but doing that kind of like high-level report that can be good information for a whole industry, and then if you want to go next, just raise your hand, and I'll keep track of the notes here. Patrick? Hi. Excited to be here. The Protocol Watching Guide, I've had fun with that a little bit, kind of poking around my hometown at work and other places, kind of nurturing that and encouraging folks to formally kind of like both watch the protocols participate in them so everything from like hey like you're you know I'm a young dad of young children so like participating in a playdate like the social protocols there or like a pickup sport or going to the grocery store and seeing like kind of like checkout queues but kind of or go to like a local town meeting or you know go into like the one of like the standards body and like listen and watch and do kind of that some of that anthropology I think that would really nurture this kind of ecosystem in terms of also just I can't like I'm like making things specific and concrete I think there can be a tendency to kind of speak very generally about protocols which can get very abstract about an abstraction thank you you. The other Patrick? Yeah, so you folks may know, I co-host with Venkat the formal protocol theory SIG, so a lot of what I like think about with respect to you know PI and with respect to the SIG is sort of reproducing a lot of the... success that's been had to kind of on the fiction side of doing some community building and like incentivizing people to, you know, kind of tackle like more nonfiction is not the right word but you know kind of technical research projects, and I guess I'm, I'm curious about what what form that that kind of thing could take right like there's been like bounty, like a bounty or, you know, kind of like contests, like sort of paid incentivized structures for people to kind of come in and want to do some, you know, in the case of fiction, obviously, it's like short stories, but like to write a paper or to do something, you know, with PI that there's, but I think that may be like, a good thing that the PI could do is also sort of, right, it's kind of like research support in some ways. Like, I don't know, like, presumably, you know, like, going after grants is probably going to have to be involved as part of some of the funding model for, you know, for, you know, technical research and maybe there's some support or materials or organization that we can provide for people that would help it be kind of, you know, like a reason to come collaborate with us. Good one. Helena? I was thinking like maybe a protocol. Futuring workshops. So actually I was really inspired by the Knowledge Futurama workshop we had last year at Esmeralda and I think you saw on LinkedIn I recently shared that so Amber, Sam and I actually wrote up an article trying to theorize kind of protocol futuring as a way to do kind of speculative design when we're not necessarily looking at at products or objects as the objects of design, but rather the protocols, and I've been also kind of using that method in my own class that I'm teaching at NYU Shanghai this semester, the Trust Experience Design course, and I was wondering if that methodology, if we can scale that to whether it's imagining future agentic protocols or protocols for various, you know, situations and scenarios and have somewhat of a data repository that can be open source. So it's a way to kind of collect, you know, these whatever inputs that people have been giving using the same methodology into kind of a one place where that data lives, and I think Protocol Institute. would be excellent for that. - Nice, good idea. Yeah, that post on LinkedIn got a lot of traction. Chanel? - Yes, I would second. I think it was Patrick's comment about research support and specifically in the form of organizational and in terms of. peer groups like that could be a way of supporting researchers that would be very cost effective since I mean I think networking is valuable in a similar way to find and that's like since we're sharing what we're working on like when I've been working on my book proposal idea based on my SOP research like a big challenge has been sort of finding. who are the right sources of advice for this and I mean I've like paid for some coaching on my own but then there's still the problem of finding the right people or like I was working with someone who decided to stop coaching so there's like knowledge is sort of a very valuable thing for research researchers doing any kind of project so like more of a way for people to share. they have sort of connections or leads to different kinds of experts and resources, I think would help researchers a lot. - Good one. Yeah, Rafa? - I mean, there's so much that you can do with this. I think I'd like to second the independent and professional analyses of a given protocol space. I think one of the things that we can definitely help a lot with is not just in terms of a review, but also I would like to see recommendations. We've already had a huge amount of success in um, being able to articulate like the shapes of a Kafka protocol. But I think saying what's bad is not good enough. I think we also need to be able to give, uh, pointed recommendations of like, what, like what good protocols look like, and I think, so this, this is like two pieces. One is not just reviews. but also like recommendations, and I think to one way that we can build towards this is in the age of AI, can we create the context space that produces good protocol thinking? I'm not sure what type of project that would look like, but there's definitely I think, ambitiously, if I'm thinking about a 200-year timeline, I would like to be able to create a mind of, related to protocols. Okay. Mike? Yeah. So, I'm, I'm, you know, I think there's, there's a, there's a, there's a, there's a, there's My thinking is all over the place and I have lots of ideas for theoretical protocols and, you know, sociology and such, but the project that's kind of the most boring but practical is, I call it ontology negotiation protocols, which is basically, and I don't know if people are familiar with the semantic web, this was a... attempted a standard for knowledge representation that was promulgated by Tim Berners-Lee and the World Wide Web Consortium, but it was largely considered a failure for various reasons. I have some ideas for how to do the same thing on a more distributed, protocol-ish basis. I think I gave, I gave, I shared a paper I'd brought on that at the protocol symposium. So that's something that I think that the world desperately needs, and I have some technical ideas for. So that's one proposed project, and I'll put my list of 16 other random ideas in the chat, was interested. Okay, Haotian? Yes, so idea was kind of like a resonate a little bit was the first idea like a syndicated protocol consultant but I think mine was like a from different point of view it's more like a protocol auditing. So basically, is this possible, like we have some theoretical framework to audit if a protocol is achievable or not, or like how much portion of it is too heroic narratives, or it's kind of against what we want, what the protocol wants to convey, right? being invisible layer or somehow so like maybe we can use like a framework like a information theory or to calculate like a upper bond lower bond something like that but uh maybe other framework like from a designer point of view or etc i'm still like beginning stage of thinking about this But yeah, that's my side. Yeah, yeah, that rhymes with what I've heard a lot of people say so I think, yeah, tools like that that people can just use on their own as well are pretty useful. Giovanni? Yeah, I was thinking, hi, about the kind of meta. which is really about, given that there are many many things that are going on and can of course grow in size and scope, even, I mean I was thinking about the the Institute being also an outlet, I mean, for work to parcel out, I mean. have lots of interns and students asking for nice things, interesting things to do. My idea is trying to really funnel lots of work, so what I mean is that I'm open also to suggestions in the sense that even if you know there may be some chores or stuff which is maybe not too exciting could be even a kind of admission ticket if you want to uh to the ride so to speak. Okay um yeah thanks Giovanni. Um I saw Zheng had his hand raised but it went back down. But yeah, if anybody else wants to raise their hand. Oh, there he is. - Hi, I'm John, founder of Social Layer. So I'm recently doing research on agentive web, so how people will use the internet with their agent, and what would the internet of agents be like, be but how to how we deal with the slops and generating contents. I think it would be this is my personal research for a while and I think it would be good to be put in the framework of Protocol Institute. feedbacks for these staffs, yeah. Awesome. Thanks, Jane. Thanks for being here, too. Amber? Hi. So I really want to think about the automatically protocol negotiation between agents. the question is who will be the protocol designer in the future? Is it a human or is it an agent? So recently in ICLR in real, there's a workshop, the first workshop about automatically mechanism design. I think this part could be a very good direction to connecting protocol design. design and AI and the protocol study. - Yeah, I'm excited for our breakout rooms here. We'll talk about vibe coding, the Protocol Institute. So we can talk a lot more about AI 'cause it's obviously an important thing that's happening right now that we should intercept. with in smart ways. Yeah anybody else have ideas that they'd like to put out there? Things you're working on maybe? Will? So, hi. I mean I'm really interested in in memory. I have recently been participating in the Memory SIG which has been great. I would love to see some effort go into like protocol also like community place-based memory, like how do communities come together and manage the stories they tell about themselves, rather than letting like the state or some other people like define that. - I think, what was it, Kevin? who's speaking Kristong language. He's from, lives in Singapore, I believe. He's got some interesting thoughts on that, I'm sure. Okay, few more hands, and then we can move on to the breakout rooms. Who's feeling shy, but has a good idea? I'm going to throw out there and prompt others to speak too. I think protocols for robotics are really interesting, and I see Anurag is on the call. If he wants to speak to that, that would be interesting to capture. I see Rich is on the call, too, and I think there's a lot of fascinating protocols around the seemingly shallow leisure activity areas, things like solving crossword puzzles or figuring out murder. there's something very interesting there about these marginal hobby cultural spaces that suddenly can become super important. So well, I would call hobby protocols, maybe, which I'll tag for Rich. I would like to hear about like an art dimension from any artists here. I know Robert is in poetry. I see a couple of people. who do art, yeah, so just throwing a few prompts out there. Raise your hand if you'd like to. - Just one additional note in terms of the art. I do think that Venkat, the strange rules art and generally like the, the art project that we did last, I think it was last summer, was the last summer that we did the art, or two summers ago I guess, it's been two summers already. I think more of that could be, it could be really effective, and I think, I mean the amount that I've learned from the poetry protocols between Guern and Robert have been also quite significant. Yeah, and to connect to an earlier thought, the Alexander I Humboldt thing, one of the reasons I'm very sensitive to the power of art is this recent example in my mind. One of the reasons he had a big impact was he really... along with the German romantics of his era, tried very hard to see both the science and technology of his time as well as the poetry of what he was doing and he spent as much time creating like beautiful drawings and maps and things to go with his written work and he inspired, I think there's one famous artist who did this really big mural. of the Andes mountains with like extremely accurate depictions of plants and animals and that became super influential for the evolution of like evolution actually the, you know, zoology botany and stuff like that. So we underestimate the impact, the artistic thread of big idea spaces can have. That's why I'm kind of like emphasizing this. We've had some experience with our second year. We have the, what we call the BUILD program, Protocol Incepting Lore and Literacy. I don't know if we made up a bad acronym for it, but we had a whole bunch of like little experimental art projects of various sorts. have a better handle on how to do more of those and more ambitious ones. Rich. Second, what I said, I was just trying to put the raise hand button. I don't use it much. Yeah, I think there's definitely something that I'm struggling towards, and I've made a bit of progress. much of this last month, in particular kinds of puzzles and mysteries and things where you have to solve something but when the solution is a surprise it is deliberately really on the edge of the possibility space and it's very distinct from say solving a logic puzzle or a Sudoku and AI can now sort of get them if you nudge it but it's you know it's really a very interesting toy problem of the kind of sort of having ideas in the real world to solve actual problems I think it's really worth exploring not because it's fun and interesting and it gets people's attention because it is actually a much more tangible and approachable version of a very important problem. that's sort of described in these, yes, admittedly quite silly hobbies. Certainly, you know, I've been trying to get agents to collaborate, to solve things like the MIT Mystery Hunt, which are like very complicated interlocking puzzles. So those are big, quite famous events and, it's getting there, but you really have to teach it what it means to have, do lateral thinking I guess, and there's definitely something there that's worth looking at some more. Eduraj? internet connectivity is not that good so if i'm not audible just let me know. Am I audible? Hello? Okay so I can speak to the protocols for robotics suggestion. So basically like a few of us have been building a like a small hobby. scale robots but like what we are like what we are trying to do is like come up with some sort of protocols in which like robots can interact with each other and AI agents can control them so like we have like lots of small demos but we are trying to keep it approachable with hobby scale robots And we are also including-- so I have a lot of internet of things. So I have been able to control with the protocol my 3D printer, and then we are also trying to include blockchain-based negotiation protocols. So Rafa has built an auction engine for the robots to get-- So there are a lot lots of small things so but you could basically call it like Physical AI kind of you would have like heard physical AI the word being thrown around but that is kind of what we are aiming at like a protocol for the infrastructure layer of where AI agents and physical infrastructure and robots can negotiate with each other. other yeah that was a small intro and I think Venkat posted the link if you want so if you go to yakroboticsgarage.com so there are like a few videos on that website you will see like what we are trying to do and then I think yakrobot.bid I think that is what Rafa, there is a small website you could check. Yeah. Thank you. Yeah, your guys' project is really cool. Who knows? Maybe we'll just launch a full, if we get enough funding from a patron, we'll launch a full robotics lab and host it in Waterloo, Ontario. or whatever. Sachin. Yeah, hey. Yeah, I wanted to sort of add to the hobby protocols idea. I think something related to protocols around hobbies. I mean, essentially protocols that develop around leisure time and how people spend. their leisure time, I think relates to like the activity of like kit making and like kit scenes. I've been sort of interested in this recently, where we shared this paper on the discord about how farmers in like the 1910s 1920s were using like general-purpose technologies to like churn butter and like plow the fields and sort of interpreting a new technology in their own way, and I think a lot of that happens during sort of like the kit making phase and like basically these sort of not fully formed products. but essentially kits that help you interpret a technology in your own way and I'm sort of interested in like I think it's sort of like a precursor. The kit scenes have their own protocols but it's also a precursor to more formal protocol. being formed. I think David Lange wrote a bit about this in "Standards Make the World" but I think there's like a lot to explore there in terms of your protocols are emerging from like leisure leisure time. Anishit? Hey, I was thinking about... a little more formal in some sense, closer to a job board that could talk about like jobs that come out of protocols or like jobs that I would probably, would at least maximize the area of like researching about protocols or something around that. space. I feel like job boards are always a good idea. How about we do Rafa and then Patrick and then we can move on to the next phase. I think there I just wanted to add that as we think about the kind of distribution. I think the fiction prizes have gone over really well, and I think the concept of prize is an underexplored vector for growth, and the I added a link in the chat of the British craft prize that that this very small entity got funding for. I'll add it here again. We're looking at new forms of craft that use new technologies, and I think we should be thinking, I think it would be really great to have different types of protocol prizes and programs that are not necessarily like commissioning a piece of research, but actually elevating current work that may be underappreciated because it's protocol because the vector is from a protocol perspective, which is less recognized as a, it's less legible, I think, in standard work today. Yeah, good idea. Um, Patrick Nast. Oh yeah, just a couple of drive-by things here in reaction to some of the things that other people said. Um, I would talk kind of a good amount about like kind of networking at the individual level and, you know, sort of like peer, peer support. Um, you know, that's also a worthwhile thing to think about at the organization level. I think there's collaboration that you talked about early on in this, but like, you know, kind of getting together, collaborating with other kind of similar organizations. I don't know, like, maybe, like, you visited, like, the Santa Fe Institute, and, like, maybe Zero X Park, and, and, you know, some of the, like, metal label, like, titles, like, kind of, like, Nancy Strickler's. kind of stuff. It would be interesting to explore like kind of partnerships with some other, you know, kind of affinity like organizations that maybe have a little bit longer reach and higher profile than we do right now. But yeah, I kind of the art stuff. I don't have a ton of great ideas here but like I just wanted to gesture towards like an art installation that I thought was really cool and kind of relevant to protocol stuff, which is that, I forget where this was. I think it was maybe in Thailand. A bunch of, or a couple of people like, basically like made these like blinking, like this huge set of LEDs that they dispersed through some trees, and it took advantage of the fact that like, Fireflies, you know, tend to synchronize with a particular frequency given enough time and so they basically like, they basically scatter these LEDs throughout, you know, the trees and eventually had this enormous sort of like, you know, carpet of fireflies all blinking in time or kind of, you know, kind of like a, you know, a sort of, you know, kind of like, you know, a sort of like, you know, a sort of like, you know, a sort of like, you know, a sort of like, you know, a sort of like, you know, a sort of like, you know, a sort of like, you know, a sort of like, you know, a sort of like, you know, a sort of like, you know, a sort of like, you know, a sort of like, you know, a sort of like, you know, a sort of like, you know, a sort of like, you know, a sort of like, you know, a sort of like kind of oscillating in a wave pattern. So I thought that like that's kind of like that kind of like interactive, but like kind of like protocol or, you know, kind of nature oriented interactive art installation would be the kind of thing that would be really cool to explore. Because there's people that, you know, obviously have like a really rich artistic background and people that have kind of more of a you know, academic type background. I think there's a lot of ways that people could work together to do something interesting like that. Yeah, that's a really cool idea. Okay, I think obviously there's a huge idea space here, and this is just probably the tip of the iceberg, but lots of stuff to do, and we'll continue. to work on it like as everybody here is members and then as the Institute you know we'll come to figure out like what is the highest priority like in addition to the magazine and yeah Patrick thanks for teaming up with the partnerships thing because I'd like Denise, James, Venkat, Tim, and I have been working well Venkat, Tim, and I have just been doing a little bit of work. James and Denise have been doing a lot of work getting ready for the first Long Now Foundation Labs project. We've been helping them out a little bit trying to like with the themes and sharing some advice from Summer of Protocols, but they've gotten this whole program designed, a whole website built, and I believe they're launching today. So if you give preview Denise and James. I think that would be really cool. I think there are probably people here that might want to apply themselves or have friends who would be very well suited for the programs or these labs. Yeah, happy to. Thank you, and it's nice to be here and hear all these fantastic ideas, and my mind is more thinking institutionally how... how you're going to do field building, network building, supportive institutional projects, and I also just want to say that there's so much rich thinking that has already been done over the last three years, and I do think that the point about dissemination and sort of cross-pollinating into existing spaces that have yet to really meaningfully engage with these concepts, I think is a whole other strata of work. that's really important, and, you know, I think doing that translational work, I think will be a core piece of your strategy. But in that vein, we're really excited to be partnering with you all on our first Long Now Labs. So I'm Denise Hearn, I'm the Director of Strategic Initiatives at Long Now, and this has been a program that we've been wanting to get off the ground for a long time, and we're so thrilled that we're partnering with Protocol Institute for our very first lab. It's called Protocols for the Long Now, and we've got three sub-labs that we are exploring. Two are open calls for applications. The first is going to be soliciting ideas for new ways of marking, experiencing, or making sense of time, and we will pick three. three ideas with a review panel of incredible folks to get follow-on funding to develop their concept into a prototype, and the second one is soliciting ideas from researchers or a small team of researchers that would like to help us look at historical examples of information revolutions that led to epistemic. collapse or crisis of some kind that can help inform our current moment of synthetic and generative media and the kind of loss of collective sense-making, and then the third is likely taking the form of a course starting in early later this fall or early 2027 which is going to focus on interspecies protocols. So if any of those things are up your alley, please, please get in touch with us. It's all going out later today. I don't know if we're, James, if you want to share the preview of our site here, but yeah, I'll pass to James for additional context too. Yeah. Timber, do you want to screen share the site? You can do that. We can also just drop a URL in. and chat. We're aiming to get it launched here this morning, so super excited about that. You know, we spend a lot of time trying to think about how we get people to imagine that an amazing humanity can exist 10,000 years from now because of the choices we made together today, and it's, we're really feeling that protocols are a key, key part of that, and, you know, just doing. storytelling around protocols in a way that brings them to life for people is kind of what we're trying to do with this lab. So super, super excited about working together on it. Can I make a quick comment here about the institution-to-institution stuff that Patrick mentioned? And Long Now is, I think, our first, but hopefully there's going to be a lot. more to come, and I think one of the things I'd ask of all of you is some of you are young early in your careers and we want to support you as much as we can in your individual creative projects and research projects. Several of you are like more mid-career with a lot of institutional affiliations and connections and like you know ability to make things happen on like larger scales, and for you, we have a special prompt, which is enable stuff for us. Like, you know, this is we've given ourselves a big, high gravitas name called Protocol Institute, but it's just Timber and me white coating random shit and organizing Zoom calls like this. We are not, you know, a multimillion dollar foundation with like a stone building and IV climbing up the wall. We need the mid-career ones amongst you to help this little baby institution get off the ground, and initiatives like this are kind of exactly what we need, where we partner and we write kind of like complement strengths, right? Long Now is like a very well-known, big brand institution with like a huge kind of, I would think of it as like... Retail technology, grand narrative reach. Like it helps shape the Silicon Valley narrative of how technology evolves, right? Our history so far has been, we're kind of like a more stealthy connective tissue amongst lots of little subcultural groups. I see in the chat the, Rafa was mentioning, the Trust Berlin, which is a small co-working space in Berlin, which has sent a disproportionate number of people to our program to the point that people calling them the Berlin Mafia. But this is a very important thing. If we have like lots of these little subcultural mafias, that's one layer of institutional networking we can do and want to do. But there's other layers we don't have much connection to. and we want those connections, right? So if you have contacts and enrolls into any institutional layers, hook us up and let's see what we can do in interesting ways, and Long Now is, we couldn't ask for a better, you know, launch partner than Long Now for what we're trying to do here. It's like so aligned on mission and content. talking to Giovanni, I mentioned this in the chat. Giovanni is an alum of last year's faculty-oriented program and we were talking about starting the first first-ever local Protocol Institute chapter at the University of Messina which is one of the oldest universities in the world, so another fascinating thing. So if you have affiliations at the university talk to to me about setting up a nice little affiliation thing there. So I know, Helena, you're at NYU Shanghai. There's a bunch of others. So let's do that. - Okay, thanks, Denise and James for sharing that, and I'm really excited to see it go out later today. Okay, next up is breakout rooms for talking about how we vibe code. Protocol Institute from the ground up, and Venkat, could you give a bit of a prompt here while I set up the breakout rooms? You're on mute. Yeah, so honestly if you ask Timber and myself even six months ago, do you want to do this? At that point, this was still a very very tentative project. We were talking to Tim Bako and the Ethereum Foundation about doing this. I think if you'd asked us six months ago, are you interested in doing this? We would have said, no, probably. Because it's just too hard to get something like this off the ground unless you have like truly interesting, unfair advantages going for you. But in the last six months, I mean, AI truly has revolutionized what you can. do with very, very little. I mean, the two websites that you see for the Protocol Institute and the Protocolized Magazine, the new wrapper on top of Substack, if you had asked us how to do that a year ago, we would have said we need another $20,000 in budget to hire a web dev to build those websites. Now Timber just white-coded them. cloud and a lot of stuff we had planned, like creating like an AI oracle that can be trained on all our research material and then answer questions about protocols. We were actually thinking of outsourcing this to like somebody who can do this a year ago and again we were budgeting in the ballpark of like 10-20 thousand dollars to do that. Now I can do it in an afternoon because couple of my own corpuses of material. This has gotten so easy now. You can make oracles. You can make powerful websites. You can make even prototype protocols. You can do lots and lots of things for extraordinarily low cost, and also you can do things that you could never even imagine doing before, and we want to take advantage of that. So the prompt for the breakout room is is what can you do in either radically different or unprecedented ways by being an AI native org? And also what can you do that is kind of traditional and needs to be done? Like, you know, maintain a networking list or whatever, but do it in a completely original way because AI lets us do it in a completely original way. We need as many ideas as we can get, including things you've already seen happening, new ideas that you haven't seen, already tried, but would like to see tried. This is kind of like, we're starting from a clean sheet here. We don't have a huge institutional baggage. So if you have good ideas for how to use AI to do this very differently, now's the time to share. So how are we going to document this timber? So we're going to do breakout groups. maybe adding everybody to the doc, maybe they can add notes to the doc? Yeah, I'll send out a message with a link to the doc, and then if somebody from your group can be the scribe, that would be helpful. So, yeah, I'll start the breakout rooms, and then let's try and come back in like 13-14 minutes, so 20 past the hour. and then we can wrap up. I see a few people are dropping off, so I will create fewer breakout rooms so that our numbers don't dwindle too much. Thanks to those for joining that have to drop off. Okay, rooms are open.silence Recording stopped. >> Recording in progress.silence Recording stopped.silence Recording in progress.Silence Recording stopped. >> By the way, Robert actually changed his LinkedIn job title toinaudible I've been encouraging people that I talked to, like if you're a member of protocol Institute, you can go ahead and just kind of like add a job title on LinkedIn and add it to your LinkedIn if you'd like. It's just protocol Institute on LinkedIn. Okay, we've got a couple of questions here. Thank you so much. Thank you. nine minutes left so what I wanted to do is just a quick share back there are four rooms so maybe take a minute if you were the scribe and share like a couple of the ideas for vibe coding this Institute and then yeah if you haven't put your notes in the doc already please do so I'll paste the link to the doc again so how about Group one. I don't know our group number. Oh, yeah. Somebody volunteer as a scribe. I'll go ahead and go first. So the so we are group two. Patrick, Anurag, Nishit, James, and myself, and we talked about a couple different things. about how do you make protocols accessible to new users and like how do you protocol people at scale when you have like agents as uh when you have new distribution channels. We talked about the design and write problems that protocol pill the AI labs. So there's like software benchmarks, like should there be like protocol benchmarks in place. Talked about training LLMs and like should we be, how do we train a corpus, or how do we gather a corpus of data, or allow agents to describe what they're doing in a protocol way, and then we talked about more factory-to-factory stuff, so thinking about factory things. thinking and thinking about agents or models as first class like consumers of the information that we're producing, it might actually look different, and then, yeah, in terms of factory thinking again, like good measurement and evaluation frameworks for factory. and also thinking about the Protocol Institute as more of a factory and less of like a factory system, I guess. - Okay, next scribe. - I can quickly go. I think our group was actually number three. So, I'll just pick a couple of ideas that I thought were interesting. One was, it's very cheap for an AI native org now to go multilingual at almost like zero marginal costs. So, especially if you have trust established already like we have with our Southeast Asia and China tracks, you can literally have like infrastructure translate everything you produce to other languages. You can have Zoom calls like this automatically be open to participation from whatever language you want. Like it'll show you, it'll live translate both spoken and written communication in real time to your language. So that's an AI native thing we should really do. Like go multilingual international. straight up. The other point I'll share from our group is how can you do very personalized interfaces to both people-to-people connection we enable and people-to-institute connections, right? You no longer need to have like very standardized ways of people relating to individuals. It can be hyper-personalized. So if the... If Protocol Institute offers some resources, it can be very personalized to individuals at scale with almost no cost. Okay. Yeah, I'll just add, I mean, we had a really interesting chat from Waze, really. who was saying she used AI to help her on board as a participant and contributor to the Protocol Institute and this community, and without AI, she wouldn't have felt able to or possible to, and I think extending that, you could imagine an AI agent-type thing trained on the corpus of information we've got, but particularly targeted to an educational part. like an onboarding flow. I think that's really nice in terms of, you know, reaching out to people who wouldn't normally say anything, you know, contribute or show up in this space and getting those diverse perspectives in that are really valuable. I think, like, building on that too, I also wonder if we could imagine, like, there are, like, AI members of this Institute, you know, particular roles or like particular perspective. It's not just trained on a corpus, but trained on a corpus with like a role and a purpose, which might be like, there's like an AI agent that's particularly for reviewing, friendly review of grant applications, for example, I think could be really interesting. Last thing I'll add, I think is worth thinking about is how we use. AI together rather than individually using AI on our own machine and then submitting that output back to the reviewer. How do we collaborate as a group of members or a smaller group together on some AI output? I think it's an interesting direction to think about. Okay, last scribe if you want to share and then I can wrap things up. Yeah, yeah, a couple of interesting things that came up where, sort of, as a general principle, like, it's easier to produce code now, so, like, intention matters and to, like, figuring out layers of intentions is an interesting problem. The other thing we talked about was, yes, similar to what Will was saying, sharing a common workspace. So like I think a lot of people mentioned needing help or sort of consulting on their like research projects, maybe an interesting way to do that would be to share like additional like context on your projects plus open questions in sort of a cloud code digestible format as like an MCP or something of that sort that then someone else on the discord can easily contribute leave comments or contributions on and and yeah the general comment was sort of maybe study studying more about like new ways in which organizations like other companies are using AI and AI protocols, so, yeah. - Okay, thanks everybody for sharing. I think like we will continue to vibe code the Protocol Institute. When I talked to David Krakauer at the Santa Fe Institute, he said that you couldn't build it today because you're not next to Los Alamos, and like, he didn't mention the money thing. But I think we kind of are next to Los Alamos because we have like the AI lab. full of researchers and accountants and lawyers that we can use. So plenty of resources to tap into. So thank you all for showing up today and participating. I'll send up a document with the notes from this meeting and then the two things I would encourage everybody to do, I'll put links in the follow-up, but one is participate in the special interest groups that we have going on. or four, formal theory, business, memory, and fiction. They're ongoing every other week. Definitely recommend joining one of those, and you can also book an office hour, thank God and I, one of us over the next couple of weeks to talk about next steps, how you might wanna get involved, membership, any ideas that you brought up today or somebody. else's idea. We're around to get this thing going and keep building an institute in a very scrappy way. So, thanks, everybody.