Mnemosyne’s Tango: 
Poetry, Film, and the Dance of Memory 
Robert Peake

Poetry and art-house ﬁlm share a fascination with mem- 
ory. Some of the most interesting work in either genre 
affects us like the ﬁrst bite of Proust’s madeleine – transport- 
ing us into a world that feels at once strange and familiar, 
like recalling a moment of childhood. 
There is another world, and it is this one. 
– Attributed to Paul Éluard 
The relationship between art and memory has long been a 
family affair, since Mnemosyne is the mother of the Muses. In 
fact, some of the earliest uses of both poetry and ﬁlm were for 
recording cultural history – either by compressing an epic tale 
into alliteration and rhyme to facilitate memorisation, or by 
compressing light and sound into physical media. Compression 
leads to portability and potency, but also imposes unique con- 
straints, which have evolved into our current understanding 
of the distinct artistic possibilities of each discipline. 
In format, the auditory and visual natures of ﬁlm and poetry 
are clearly different. Yet a ﬂickering screen can be viewed like 
a page, and a poem can be read like a script. The cæsura, line 
break, and stanza break in poetry mirror ﬁlm’s range of visual 
transitions. Clearly, they have some fundamental moves in 
common. How, then, does the poetryﬁlm best come together to 
fascinate, transport, and change us? 
The success of the ﬁlm-poem collaboration lies in the mne- 
monic dance between the genres. The dance ﬂoor is not built 
upon what is depicted, but what is evoked. While the mimetic 
act is symbolic – a sun is described in a poem, and a sun ap- 
pears in the ﬁlm – the mnemonic dance performs the inherent 
strengths of each genre, collaborating with the same sensitivi- 
ty, synchronicity, and passion as a tango duet. 
Consider, for example, the effect of the ﬂickering smash cuts at 
the end of Alastair Cook’s poetryﬁlm of Bernard and Cerinthe 
by Linda France. 
* 
The effect is nearly synæsthetic – the ﬂash 
of a face soon crescendos into a ﬂeeting moment in which we 
can almost smell, taste, touch the botanic-erotic longing. Had 
the ﬁlmmaker depicted the nouns of the poem literally – »lips«, 
»seeds«, »buttocks«, or even the honeywort ﬂower itself – the 
poetryﬁlm would not have transported us so effectively. 
The quick smash cut has become a popular technique for this 
reason – echoing the fragmentary nature of memory itself, 
evoking something indistinct over the textures of the poem. 
At the opposite end of the timescale, an equally effective 
technique is the slow dissolve – be it an actual cross-fade or the 
evolution of organic forms through time-lapse, hyper-lapse, 
or progressive visual technique. The reduction of images into 
abstract patterns, and the gradual revelation of concrete forms, 
again mirrors the act of remembering. 
Individual recall is both creative and destructive. Ask three 
people to describe the same event, and you will get three 
different stories. The inclusion or omission of detail, as it is 
strained through ﬁlters of consciousness, alters truth at the 
moment of access. Old memories are replaced with new tales, 
overwriting themselves in the midst of their self-making. 
Indeed, what many describe after a near-death experience 
– their life ﬂashing before their eyes – might be a bit like a 
private screening of poetryﬁlm. 
On a social scale, the mnemonic dance is both deﬁant and 
afﬁrming: Deﬁant in the ways that art-house ﬁlm protests 
the contrivances of Hollywood, and the poem takes a stand 
against marketing-speak; afﬁrming because the virtuous cycle 
is this: existence is a reason to make art, and art is a reason to 
exist. First and always, though, it must give us a nibble of the 
madeleine. 
