Prufrock Protocol

Poetry is the one of the longest of long nows in human history, charting timeless themes (long) through concrete moments (nows) of individual expression. As such, poetry is already a latent timepiece we can surface and utilise to mark a new kind of time: at once unique (individual expression) and timeless (cyclical, enduring, essentially human) themes. This is a form of time that continually reinvents itself, folding at pinch points into recurrent themes yet recasting them through both contemporary context and individual consciousness.

While LLMs create a regression to the mean of human concerns, this is the opposite -- an expansion of "humanity" in aggregate without time dimension or individual expression into the specific instances in time of individual consciousness expressing itself--thus the "infinite game" of using words to transcend words, giving specificity to the timeless.

"Bring to me, it said, continual proof / you've been alive" - Stephen Dunn, "Different Hours"
"I have measured out my life in coffee spoons" -T.S. Eliot, "The Love Song of J. Alfred Prufrock"

"It is sweet to think I was a companion in an expedition that never ends" -Czeslaw Milos, The Witness of Poetry

Paul Valéry: a poem is never finished, only abandoned

glasss bead game
in the future, everyone will be a poet for 15 seconds a day
first thought, best thought - Ginsberg

blockchain guards not collapse of financial authority, but veracity of human expression

contrast with: https://theverseverse.com/ - theVERSEverse is a poetry NFT gallery where poem = work of art

Possible domains:

prufrock.now
prufrockprotocol.com/net/org

sonnet approach:

14 poets write 14 poems of 14 lines over 14 days at 14 random times

day 1 - one chosen poet writes line 1
day 2 - all poets respond to that one chosen poet's line 1 with line 2
day 3 - all poets respond to a new chosen poet's line 2 with line 3
...
day 14 - all poets respond to a new chosen poet's line 13 with line 14

order of whose line is chosen for what day is predetermined but not announced, so each poet is chosen one time
calls for lines are sent out at a random time of day during predetermined waking hours of each poet each day
the lines are sent at the same "time of day" for each poet based on their timezone
the poet agrees to respond as soon as safely possible after being sent the line

optional - also send a photo or short video (max 5 seconds) with each line; at the end AI makes a film-poem using the media, text, and author reading the poem

optional - map the interconnection of the lines as an interactive infographic

optional - make film-poems from the results

---

Notes 2026-05-09:

1. Stop worrying about the name Prufrock — Eliot transcended Prufrock's quotidian malaise and milquetoast middling by making it art
2. The starter lines will be from poems 100, 1000, etc. years ago
3. Sonnets (14 lines, the only modern constraint) are just one experiment
4. More likely we will give poets 2 lines (neither their own) as starters for sense of trajectory